__D3.js__ → Data Driven Documents. It's a JavaScript library to create dynamic and interactive data visualizations in the browser. It takes input data and maps it into a visual representation of that data. You use HTML or SVG elements with D3's built-in methods to transform the data into a visualization.

## Add & Select Document Eelments
_Select one element from the document:_
```javascript
d3.select('svg')
```

_Select a group of elements:_
```javascript
d3.selectAll('rect')
```
- `return` → array of HTML nodes for all the items in the document that match the input string

_Add an element to the selected node:_
```javascript
d3.select('svg')
  .append('rect')
```
- `arg` → the element we want to add

_Set the text of the selected node:_
```javascript
d3.select('rect')
  .append('text')
  .text('string')
```

## Work with Data
When you have a set of data, you can apply D3 methods to display it on the page.

### Attach the data to the selected elements
```javascript
d3.selectAll('ul')
  .data(dataset)
  .enter()
  .append('li')
  .text(d => d)
```
The enter function looks at the selected elements from the page, and compares them to the number of data items in the set. If there are fewer elements than the data items, it creates the missing elements.

The `.text()` function accepts a callback so it makes use of the data.

### Add inline CSS styles on dynamic elements
```javascript
...
.append('li')
.style('color', 'blue')
```
The `style` function also accepts a callback. The return of that callback will define value of the property being set.
```javascript
...
.append('li')
.style('color', d => {
  if(d.length > 6) {
    return 'green'
  }
  return 'red'
})
```

### Adding Attributes
We use the `attr(key, value)` function to set attributes on dynamic elements. It accepts a callback as the second parameter, like in the `style()` function.
```javascript
.append('li')
.style('color', 'blue')
.attr('width', '2em')
```

# SVG in D3
__SVG__ → Scalable Vector Graphics. If you zoom in or out on an object, it will not appear pixelated.

D3 uses SVGs to create the shapes for the visualization. SVGs support mutiple shapes, such as rectangles (`<rect>`) and circles (`<circle>`). You can specify where it goes with x and y coordinates. Positive x/y will push the element to the right or down, respectively.

Shape | Attributes | Description
--- | --- | ---
`rect` | x, y, height, width |
| | fill | the color of the rect
`circle` | fill |
| | cx | x coordinate
| | cy | y coordinate
| | r | radius of the circle

_Adding a label:_\
You can add a label using the `<text>` element. Appent the value to be displayed on a `text` element to the `svg`. You then set the x and y coordinates.

_Adding a tooltip:_\
A tooltip shows more information about an item when the user overs that item. You can create your own tooltip using JavaScript or instead use the `title` element. Append the `title` element to the `rect` or `circle` and add a inner text with the `.text()` function.
```javascript
...
.append('rect')
.append('title')
  .text(d => d.description)
```

_Adding legend:_\
Unfortunately, D3 currently doesn't have a native way to add a legend. You can create one using SVG elements and the data supplied.\
D3 supplies color schemes that you can use. The steps necessary to create a simple legend are:
1. Set a scale for the color scheme.
2. Create `g` SVG elements, and as data provide the scaled color scheme domain. Position it where you want the legend to be.
3. Append a `rect` to the `g` elements.
4. Append a `text` element to the `g` elements

An example of a simple legend:
```javascript
const colorScheme = d3.scaleOrdinal(d3.schemeDark2)

const legend = svg.selectAll('.graph-legend')
  .data(colorScheme.domain())
  .enter()
  .append('g')
    .attr('class', 'graph-legend')
    .attr('id', 'legend')
    .attr('transform', (d, i) => `translate(0, ${SVG_HEIGHT * 0.25 + i * (LEGEND_SQUARE_SIZE+2)})`)

legend.append('rect')
  .attr('x', SVG_AVAILABLE_WITDH - LEGEND_SQUARE_SIZE)
  .attr('width', LEGEND_SQUARE_SIZE)
  .attr('height', LEGEND_SQUARE_SIZE)
  .style('fill', colorScheme)
  
legend.append('text')
  .attr('x', SVG_AVAILABLE_WITDH - (LEGEND_SQUARE_SIZE+5))
  .attr('y', 13)
  .attr('text-anchor', 'end')
  .style('font-size', '0.8rem')
  .text(d => (d) ? 'Riders with doping allengations' : 'No doping allegations' )
```

# Creating Basic Charts
## Bar Chart
1. Create an encompass svg element.
2. Create a rect for each data point in the array.
3. Give each rect a dynamic x and height, using the callback function in the attr() method.
4. Invert the y position so the bars are upright (y = heightOfSVG - heightOfBar).

```javascript
svg.selectAll('rect')
	.data(dataset)
	.enter()
	.append('rect')
	.attr('x', (d, i) => i * 30)
	.attr('y', h - d * 3)
	.attr('width', 25)
	.attr('height', d => d * 3)
```

## Scatterplot Chart
__Scatterplot__ → uses circles to map data points, which have two values each tied to the x and y axes.

1. Create an encomapass svg element.
2. Create a circle for each data point in the array.
3. Give each circle a dynamic cx and cy, using the callback function in the attr() method. Also set a radius (r) attribute.
4. Invert the cy position so the data is correctly placed from bottom to top.
5. You can add labels using the text element.

```javascript
svg.selectAll('circle')
	.data(dataset)
	.enter()
    .append('circle')
    .attr('cx', d => d[0])
    .attr('cy', d => h - d[1])
    .attr('r', 5)
```

# Scale
Avoids the data going outsite of the svg because the data is larger than its width or height. Scales are functions that tell the program how to map a set of raw data points onto the pixels on the SVG canvas.
D3 has several scale types:
- `scaleLinear` → used for quantitive data.
- `scaleTime` → linear scale of time.
- `scaleOrdinal` → maps a discrete domain to a discrete range.
- `scaleBand` → another type of ordinal scale. The output range is continous and numeric.
- `scaleQuantize` → maps a continuous, quantitive domain to a discrete range.
- `scaleThreshold` → another type of a quantize scale. They allow you to map arbitrary subsets of the domain to discrete values in the range. The input domain is divided into slices based on a set of thresold values.

Check more scales in the [D3 documentation](https://github.com/d3/d3/blob/master/API.md#scales-d3-scale).

_Setting the domain of a scale:_
```javascript
const xScale = d3.scaleLinear()
  .domain([0, d3.max(dataset)])
```
The domain is the input information of the scale. It's the range of the set of values in the dataset.

_Setting the range of a scale:_
```javascript
const xScale = d3.scaleLinear()
  .range([0, SVG_WIDTH])
```
The range is the output information of the scale. You can use it, for example, to map the dataset points along the axis on the SVG canvas.


### Finding the minimum and maximum values in a dataset
D3 provides functions to determine the minimum and maximum value in a dataset:
- `d3.min(dataset)`
- `d3.max(dataset)`
- `d3.extent(dataset)` → computes the minimum and maximum values in an array

If there is a nested array on the dataset, you can pass a callback function and say to D3 which value you want to be compared. *e.g.* `d3.min(data, d => d[0])`

## Setting a Scale
1. Create two variables to hold the x and y scales.
2. Call the type of scale you want it to be (e.g. d3.scaleLinear()).
3. Set the domain to be equal to where it starts (0) and where it ends (the max value of the dataset).
4. Set the range to be equal to where it is supposed to start (0 + padding) and where it's supposed to end (w - padding).
5. Remeber to keep the plot right-side-up. When you set the range for the y coordinates, the heigher value is the first argument.
6. Pass the scale to set the x/cx and y/cy values of the svg rect/circle elements to position the data on the SVG.

```javascript
const xScale = d3.scaleLinear()
	.domain([0, d3.max(dataset, d => d[0])])
	.range([padding, w - padding])

...
	.attr('x', d => xScale(d[0])
```

# Axes
D3 provides axes for all directions:
- `axisTop`
- `axisRight`
- `axisBottom`
- `axisLeft`

As the argument of the function, you pass the scale of the respective side. You use a general SVG component (`g` element) to render it on the SVG canvas.

## Creating an Axis
1. Create an axis variable.
2. Append an g element to the SVG.
3. Add an transform attribute to place the axis in the correct place (0, h - padding).
4. Call the axis variable.

```javascript
const xAxis = d3.axisBottom(xScale)

svg.append('g')
	.attr('transform', `translate(0, ${h - padding})`)
	.call(xAxis)
```

# Sources
[freeCodeCamp](https://freecodecamp.org/)